---
title: "Gorgon City Impress Bristol Crowd"
slug: "gorgon-city-2"
date: "2014-11-22"
author: "Paige Evans"
rating: "undefined"
---

Regardless of whether or not you're a big fan of house music, I’d say it’s pretty hard to not be aware of who Gorgon City are. Over the past year, this electronic music production duo - North London producers Kye "Foamo" Gibbon and Matt "RackNRuin" Robson-Scott – have entered the music scene with many successful leaps and bounds, and even more admirably, in a genre which is becoming a very crowded market. This being said, I’m not a massive fan. Not saying I have a vendetta against them, but more so this style of music isn’t really my thing – I’m slightly more conservative. Still, I’m a lover of Bristol’s buzzing nightlife and aura, and attending this gig gave me an excuse to drag my sister along and see what she actually does in club-like situations. Basically I thought, ‘Hey, why not?’ - and I was more than happily surprised.

The insane thing about playing a gig in a city like Bristol, and even more so at the Bristol O2, is that the excitement for the night begins way before the sun has even set. Unlike the calm, tame, mellow atmosphere that Exeter holds and that (some) folks take pride in, Bristol is a huge pod of energy. My apprehension was still nearing a peak, but the city, and my sister’s reassurance, really started getting me hyped. So, after leaving the Premier Inn – highly recommended, the bed is fabulous - going for some cheeky drinks and getting our glam on, I felt sufficiently prepared to literally ‘face the music’. Walking round the corner towards the O2 and seeing girls in their clubbing finery (not all the most flattering, but again, I’ve said I’m pretty conservative) shows that this night was meant to be a big one. Understatement? Oh, yes.

The entire O2 was a dome of pounding bass, loud beats, and eccentric lighting – the perfect backdrop for an act of Gorgon City’s vibe. It was electric. Drinks were flowing, the atmosphere was growing in anticipation, and people were literally running to the dance-floor, which was one thing I found so refreshing. No awkwardness of "Oh, should we start dancing?" and the beginning tumbleweed hour where no one does anything, just boom, in and ready. Sarah Love was the first DJ on, and although a wee bit annoying with the repetitive lines of "Yeah, yeah, let me see your hands!", she was a good warm-up, and all my initial worries vanished.

Sinead Harnett was the main support act for Gorgon City, and she did her job well. Her tone was more sensual, her attitude down to earth, and her vocals were stunning. A point to be said may be that her style of music brought the energy of the place down slightly, but she was a joy to listen to – and also a joy to watch, based on the change in behaviour among the men in the crowd. The next DJ, who remains nameless to me even now, was absolutely adorable. His baby face was juxtaposed to what was happening around him; I even said to my sister that I’d take him home and mother him. But as soon as he stepped on stage, wow. The crowd was going mental, his set was crazy and I’d even go as far as to say I was a little gutted when his time ended. Adios, cherub.

But then for Gorgon City, who were fantastic. The whole crowd was united under one umbrella of love for their well know tunes, catchy lyrics and, of course, their punching basslines and sudden drops. Their vocalists actually caused a little goosebump or two – who knew that such notes could be hit live, and with such power? Unmissable, Ready For Your Love, Real, and Imagination were real standouts, and the chorus that Gorgon City received back from the crowd was huge. They appeared humbled, slightly laughing it off. But it was most definitely well deserved. My hostility towards this genre of music is now forever dead; I shall now not be pretentious and feel it is simply a few people pressing some buttons. There was skill. There was good feeling. And there was satisfaction on my behalf for giving it a go.

I got back at 3am, equipped with sore feet, an intoxicated mind, and a very comfy bed. Thank you, Gorgon City.
